## Introduction {.page_break_before}

The rapid advancement of omics and sequencing technologies has led to an accelerated growth of genomic data.
Driven by this data, there are similar increases in the number of available bioinformatics software tools, often containing novel and diverse algorithms of particular interest to biomedical researchers.[1,2].
Biomedical researchers wanting to use this software often have access to high-performance clusters (“clusters”), but lack the operating system-level permissions and advanced skills required to install and run the software.
None of the necessary skills are currently included in the traditional life science curriculum at major universities.
Usability is further hindered by the absence of any standardization and the wide variety of software development tools employed.
This is directly observable in many academic software tools lacking a user-friendly interface[5].

As the dependence of biomedical researchers on computational software continues to increase, software developers need to consider more user-friendly distribution and install methods.
Modern software distribution, having already faced user-friendliness issues, is already becoming more reliant on platforms such as package managers[6,7] and containers[8].
Both promise to simplify software development while increasing the usability and reproducibility of biomedical research[8,9].

Package managers first appeared nearly thirty years ago as software developers sought to streamline the entire installation process.
To install via package manager, the user must only specify the desired software, called a “package;” the download, installation, configuration, and dependencies are all handled by the package manager. 
Many operating systems have built-in package managers (e.g. APT), which may not be available to cluster users, while others must be downloaded and installed by the user. 
Some package managers (e.g. Conda[6]) are programming language agnostic, while others are designed for a particular language (e.g pip[10]).

A more recent software distribution solution is containerization.
The end-user downloads a container “image” that includes the software, dependencies, and anything else necessary to run the software.
Though the imaged software is not typically itself installed, many do require the installation of containerization runtime software. 
When run, the runtime software creates a consistent, isolated sandbox environment, then runs the imaged software inside the sandbox[11].
This sandbox design makes the images both highly portable (compatible with different computers) and easily shareable (transferable between different computers), which has already led to wide adaptation in bioinformatics[7,12].

In addition to the ease of installation and use offered by both package managers and containers, such platforms must also meet the biomedical community’s need for compatibility with high performance clusters.
However, the  relative performance of these package managers and containers remains unknown.
Our review summarizes developing practices across the most common package managers and containers, while discussing the challenges, advantages, and limitations of using them from both the developer and the user perspectives.
By taking a survey of all the available package managers and container software, there is now a comprehensive list of the different attributes of each one, informing the community so that people can make educated decisions about which package manager or container makes the most sense for their project.
We also propose principles that can make packaging and containerizing of bioinformatics software more sustainable and reproducible, ultimately increasing the usability of bioinformatics software.
