## Discussion {.page_break_before}

### Existing problems with software distribution and installation

The installation process of bioinformatics research software is typically a multi-step process, starting with the end-user locating and downloading the software. 
Next is the actual installation, during which the end-user must determine what dependencies are missing and resolve them by installing the required software[5](https://paperpile.com/c/4vBDtY/kjwlC).
Even in cases where the end-user is familiar with this process, they are typically installing on high-performance clusters where they are constrained by user-level permissions that prevent them from following standard installation procedures.



- root access limitations
- reproducibility of findings
- version conflicts
- dependency resolution

### Definitions and explanations of distribution system types

#### Package Managers

Package managers appeared nearly thirty years ago as software developers sought to automate and standardize the software installation process.
The earliest package managers (e.g. APT and RPM) were built into Linux operating systems and lacked now common features like dependency resolution.
Modern package managers are available for all major operating systems, with both integrated and user-installed options available.
Some are package managers are limited to software written in a specific programming language (e.g. pip distributes software written in Perl), while others are limited to sofware with a particular purpose (e.g. Bioconda distributes omics software).

Every package managers uses its own package format, which follows the general structure shown in Figure @fig:package-schematic. 

![
**Schematic showing standard package contents.**
Though the exact contents varies between different package formats, all include the software and relevant metadata necessary to complete installation.
](images/package_schematic.png){#fig:package-schematic}

The metadata gives the package manager the necessary information to install the packaged software. 

To use a package manager, a user instructs the package manager to install software, then the package manager performs all the necessary steps to install the software as shown in Figure @fig:package-manager-usage.
Assuming the software is not already installed, the package manager retrieves the appropriate package from the repository, a server that stores all of the available packages.
The package manager then uses the package's metadata to determine what it needs to do to complete installation.
For most packages, this includes verifying the installation of all dependencies, which are other pieces of software that must be installed prior to the initial software being installed.

![
**Standard workflow for installing software via a package manager.**
The user, usually an admin, asks the package manager to install a specific piece of software. If the software is not already installed, the package manager fetches the approrpriate package from the repository. If any of the dependencies are not already installed, the package manager "loops" through the missing dependencies. Once all dependencies are installed, the original software is installed.  
](images/package_manager_usage.png){#fig:package-manager-usage width="6in"}

The package manager verifies each dependency by confirming that the dependency is already installed or installing the dependency if it is missing. 
For missing dependencies, the package manager retrieves the dependency's package from the repository and starts the installation procedure for that package.
Once all the dependencies are installed, the initially requested software is installed. 
However, the package manager often goes through several iterations of this process because every dependency can have it's own list of dependencies, in which case each of the dependency's dependencies must be verified through the same process.

In most cases, a package manager is able to install all of the missing dependencies, but there are two relatively common problems that a package manager cannot overcome.
The first is circular dependencies, which occurs when software A has a dependency on software B and software B has a dependency on software A.
A package manager cannot install A without installing B first, but B cannot be installed without installing A first.
The second is conflicting versions, which occurs when software A and software B have the same dependency, but require different versions.
Package managers only allow one version of software to be installed at a time, preventing both A and B from having their depedencies met simultaneously.

Administrators often block users from installing software to prevent unwanted changes to both the operating system and existing sofware. This includes blocking access to package managers built into the operating system, as well as preventing users from installing their own.


  - benefits for the developer
    - mature technology - higher degree of familiarity
    - allows dependency specification (including versions)
  -limitations for the developer
    - can't always use to install missing dependencies for end-user
  - benefits for the end-user
    - package size is minimal (dependencies aren't duplicated)
    - installs missing dependencies
  - limitations for the end-user
    - not always accessible (unless admin user)
    - can't install multiple versions of same software
- containerization
  - definition

![
**Schematic showing standard containerization objects.**
](images/containerization_schematics.png){#fig:containerization-schematics width="6in"}

![
**Running containerized software**
](images/container_usage.png){#fig:container_usage width="6in"}

  - benefits for the developer
    - include specific versions of dependencies
    - known running environment
      - fewer test variables
      - reproducibility of results
  - limitations for the developer
    - learn a new system instead of focusing on research
  - benefits for the end-user
    - no installation (except possible runtime)
    - no dependency issues
    - sandbox provides computer system security
  - limitations for the end-user
    - container size
    - duplication of dependencies
    - root access requirement to install runtime
    - configuration in cluster
- centralized repositories
  - definition
    - channels
  - benefits
    - known download site
    - hosting is taken of
  - limitations
    - repo specific restrictions

![
**Relative popularity of package managers.**
Google Trends @https://trends.google.com/trends/ was used to assess the relative average popularity of each package manager. 
Package managers were omitted when Google Trends did not have enough data to return a result. 
The method detailed in "How do you compare large number of items in Google Trends?" @https://digitaljobstobedone.com/2017/07/10/how-do-you-compare-large-numbers-of-items-in-google-trends/ was used to overcome Google Trends' limitation of five search terms. 
](images/trends.png){#fig:trends width="6in"}

![
**Usage of package managers in academia based on citations.**
For package managers introduced with a major publication, the number of citations for their publication was found via Google Scholar @https://scholar.google.com/ and recorded.
Package managers without a major publication were excluded.
](images/citations.png){#fig:citations width="6in"}

![
**Usage of package managers in academia based on Google Scholar Results.**
Each package manager's name was used as a search term on Google Scholar @https://scholar.google.com/ and the number of results was recorded.
Package manager names that returned results for things other than the package manager were omitted.
](images/google_scholar_results.png){#fig:google-scholar width="6in"}

![
**Total number of packages.**
The initial list of all available sofware for each package manager was compiled by parsing its online repository with WebScraper @https://webscraper.io/
(AppImage @https://appimage.github.io/apps/,
Bioconda @https://bioconda.github.io/conda-recipe_index.html,
Bioconductor @http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/BiocViews.html#___Software,
BioContainers @https://github.com/BioContainers/containers,
CRAN @https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/available_packages_by_name.html, 
Docker @https://hub.docker.com/search?q=&type=image&page=1, 
Easybuild @https://easybuild.readthedocs.io/en/latest/version-specific/Supported_software.html, 
Flatpack @https://flathub.org/apps/category/All, 
GNU Guix @https://guix.gnu.org/packages/, 
omicX @https://omictools.com/software?page=1, 
pip @https://pypi.org/simple/, 
Singularity @https://singularity-hub.org/apps, 
Snap @https://snapcraft.io/store, 
Spack @https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/package_list.html, 
Vagrant @https://app.vagrantup.com/boxes/search?order=desc&page=2375, 
and Zero Install @http://roscidus.com/0mirror/feed-list)
or by querying the package manager directly (APT, Biocontainers, Conda, Homebrew).
Each list converted to a set with pandas @https://pandas.pydata.org/ and NumPy @https://numpy.org/, which removed all capitalization and duplicates.
The number of entries in a package manager's set was taken to be the total number of packages available for that package manager.
](images/total_number_of_packages.png){#fig:total-number-of-packages width="6in"}

![
**Packages heatmap**
The sets obtained in @fig:total-number-of-packages were compared with the set intersection function to find the number of commonalities between all pairs of package managers.
](images/tools_heatmap.png){#fig:tools-heatmap width="6in"}

![
**Overlap in available packages between omics package managers.**
The sets obtained for Bioconda, Bioconductor, and omicX in @fig:total-number-of-packages were compared with the set intersection function to find the number of commonalities between all combinations of the three package managers.
](images/overlap_in_tools.png){#fig:overlap-in-tools width="6in"}

![
**Availablity of Bioconda's packages in non-omics package managers.**
The sets obtained for Bioinformatics Tools and the non-omics package managers in @fig:total-number-of-packages were compared with the set intersection function to find the number of commonalities between Bioconda and the non-omics package managers.
](images/tools_shared_with_bioconda.png){#fig:tools-shared-with-bioconda width="6in"}

![
**Availablity of Bioinformatics Tools' packages in non-omics package managers.**
The sets obtained for Bioinformatics Tools and the non-omics package managers in @fig:total-number-of-packages were compared with the set intersection function to find the number of commonalities between Bioinformatics Tools and the non-omics package managers.
](images/tools_shared_with_biotools.png){#fig:tools-shared-with-biotools width="6in"}

![
**Availability of omicX's packages in non-omics package managers.**
The sets obtained for omicX and the non-omics package managers in @fig:total-number-of-packages were compared with the set intersection function to find the number of commonalities between omicX and the non-omics package managers.
](images/tools_shared_with_omicX.png){#fig:tools-shared-with-omicX width="6in"}
