## Methods {.page_break_before}

**@fig:google-trends-chart**
Google Trends @https://trends.google.com/trends/ was used to assess the relative average popularity of each package manager. 
Package managers were omitted when Google Trends did not have enough data to return a result. 
The method detailed in "How do you compare large number of items in Google Trends?" @https://digitaljobstobedone.com/2017/07/10/how-do-you-compare-large-numbers-of-items-in-google-trends/ was used to overcome Google Trends' limitation of five search terms. 

@fig:citations-chart
For package managers introduced with a major publication, the number of citations for their publication was found via Google Scholar @https://scholar.google.com/ and recorded.
Package managers without a major publication were excluded.

@fig:google-scholar-chart
Each package manager's name was used as a search term on Google Scholar @https://scholar.google.com/ and the number of results was recorded.
Package manager names that returned results for things other than the package manager were omitted.

@fig:available-packages-chart
The initial list of all available sofware for each package manager was compiled by parsing its online repository with WebScraper @https://webscraper.io/
(AppImage @AppImage-packages,
Bioconda @Bioconda-packages,
Bioconductor @Bioconductor-packages,
BioContainers @Biocontainers-packages,
CRAN @CRAN-packages,
Docker @Docker-packages,
EasyBuild @EasyBuild-packages,
Flatpak @Flatpak-packages,
GNU Guix @GNU_Guix-packages,
omicX @omicX-packages,
pip @pip-packages,
Singularity @Singularity-packages,
Snap @Snap-packages,
Spack @Spack-packages,
Vagrant @Vagrant-packages,
and Zero Install @Zero_Install-packages)
or by querying the package manager directly (APT, Biocontainers, Conda, Homebrew).
Each list converted to a set with pandas @https://pandas.pydata.org/ and NumPy @https://numpy.org/, which removed all capitalization and duplicates.
The number of entries in a package manager's set was taken to be the total number of packages available for that package manager.

@fig:available-packages-heatmap
The sets obtained in @fig:available-packages-chart were compared with the set intersection function to find the number of commonalities between all pairs of package managers.

@fig:bio-package-managers-venn-diagram
The sets obtained for Bioconda, Bioconductor, and omicX in @fig:available-packages-chart were compared with the set intersection function to find the number of commonalities between all combinations of the three package managers.

@fig:bioconda-packages-availability-chart
The sets obtained for Bioinformatics Tools and the non-omics package managers in @fig:available-packages-chart were compared with the set intersection function to find the number of commonalities between Bioconda and the non-omics package managers.

@fig:biotools-packages-availability-chart
The sets obtained for Bioinformatics Tools and the non-omics package managers in @fig:available-packages-chart were compared with the set intersection function to find the number of commonalities between Bioinformatics Tools and the non-omics package managers.

@fig:omicX-packages-availability-chart
The sets obtained for omicX and the non-omics package managers in @fig:available-packages-chart were compared with the set intersection function to find the number of commonalities between omicX and the non-omics package managers.